
**Policy and Procedure 3.9 Procurement**

**Purpose**

The purchase of goods and services is necessary for the smooth operation
of ESIP. The aim of the internal control system for the supplying of
goods and services is to ensure orders are handled by individuals having
skills in evaluating what purchases are required from suppliers offering
the best deals, to ensure purchases made do not exceed the budget
provided and to ensure purchased goods and services conform with the
quantity and price specified in the order.

**Methodology**

ESIP shall follow certain methods in purchasing goods, equipment and
services required for the needs of the organization or its projects. Use
of competitive bidding shall be a priority practice. The first criterion
in choosing a supplier shall be the lowest price. However, if a supplier
does not provide the required level of service or an adequate guarantee,
then other criteria shall also be considered. ESIP shall specify in the
purchase file the reasons the lowest bid was not chosen.

Due diligence must be followed for acquisitions of goods and services
(resources), especially for procurement of resources that include costs
for acquisition, operation, storage, maintenance, safeguards, or
disposal. All acquisitions should be approved by the Executive Director.
To the extent possible, a request for an acquisition must be submitted
at least 10 days before the resource must be ordered. A comparative
analysis of available resources should be completed prior to
procurement. The procurement of resources that cost more than \$10,000
must follow a formal bidding or quote process to ensure that the
resource is acquired at a competitive price.

-   Purchases under the micro-purchase threshold, currently \$10,000, are
    awarded without soliciting competitive quotes; however, to the
    extent possible, prices are shopped using online and/or local
    stores.

-   For purchases above \$10,000 and below \$150,000, a quotation/invoice
    shall be obtained from two-three qualified sources or from as wide
    of a range of suppliers deemed practical in terms of time,
    potential savings and good business practice. Four major factors
    enter into supplier selection: quality, delivery, service and
    price. For meeting hotel contracts, ESIP will consider sponsor
    needs as well as price. These quotes will be reviewed by the
    Executive Director and the award must be specifically approved in
    advance by the Executive Director.

-   For purchases above the simplified acquisition threshold, currently
    \$150,000, ESIP must select vendors or suppliers based on publicly
    solicited sealed bids or competitive proposals. ESIP will always
    negotiate for the best value in performance and price, unless
    specified otherwise in a Government Request for Proposal (RFP). If
    all non-price evaluation factors are equal, the lowest cost
    supplier is awarded the order. ESIP will also perform a cost or
    price analysis for purchases over \$150,000, to make independent
    estimates before receiving bids or proposals.

-   Purchases from a sole source shall be explained in the purchase
    file.

-   To the extent possible, purchases will be combined in an effort to
    negotiate better terms and prices.

-   The purchase file shall contain all the documents pertaining to each
    transaction, i.e. the purchase requisition, quotations, contact
    information of suppliers purchase contracts or orders, invoices,
    delivery slips and any other pertinent documents. The purchase
    file may be in electronic or hard copy form depending on the
    Organization's determination of the best method to support and
    retain purchasing decisions.

**Award Types**

Awards are typically fixed price, unit price, or time and materials.
Other types of awards based on normal commercial practices may be used.
The Board of Directors must approve award of any purchase based on cost
reimbursement (CR).

**Ethical Considerations**\
Individuals authorized to perform purchasing functions shall:

-   Avoid the intent or appearance of unethical or uncompromising
    practices in relationships, actions and communications.

-   Demonstrate compliance with this policy by adhering to applicable
    laws and policies using sound business judgment within the
    authority granted.

-   Abstain from any private business or professional activity that
    would create a real or perceived conflict of interest between
    personal interests and the interest of the Organization. Any
    potential conflicts must be reported to the Executive Director and
    the Board of Directors.

-   Obtain the most competitive pricing possible using best industry
    practices.

-   Ensure the review and flow down of applicable grant terms and
    conditions are incorporated into all purchase orders and
    subawards.
-   Ensure that contracts are only made with responsible contractors who possess the potential ability to perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed procurement. Consideration shall be given to such matters as contractor integrity; compliance with public policy, including, where applicable, record of past performance; financial and technical resources or accessibility to other necessary resources. In certain circumstances, contracts with certain parties are restricted by implementation of executive order 12549, “Debarment and Suspension,” at 2 CFR parts 180 and 1880.

Individuals shall be responsible for protecting proprietary and
financial information of its suppliers. Use or disclosure of supplier
information for other than the purpose of which it has been supplied is
strictly prohibited. Supplier pricing information shall not be disclosed
outside of the Organization without the prior written approval of the
supplier.



Approved by the ESIP Board of Directors on TBD - April 20, 2020.
